[Music]
hello it's good to have you with us I'm
sirel vaner you're watching counting the
cost on Alia Zer that's your weekly look
at the world of business and economics
this week Israeli reservists have left
their offices many businesses have
ground to a halt Israel's government
moves to stabilize its economy hit by
the war on Gaza also this week hotels
emptied and flights cancelled we look at
the cost for the tourism industry in
Israel in Palestine and the whole Middle
East and the global economy is at a
dangerous juncture the World Bank warns
of the serious economic impact of
geopolitical
[Music]
tensions
known as the nation for startups
Israel's almost $500 billion economy is
one of the most developed in the Middle
East in spite of its decades long
conflict with the Palestinians the
country has low debt a current account
Surplus and high foreign exchange
reserves now as Israel's military
offensive escalates the war on Gaza is
hitting the economy hard and putting its
resilience to the test here's how the
economy has been affected so far the
currency has lost value against the
dollar almost every day hitting an
8-year low and bonds tumbled economic
sectors such as construction and
agriculture are at a standstill a record
call up of military reservists has left
businesses short staffed the tech
industry which accounts for 18% of
Israel's GDP and half of all exports is
particularly hard hit consumer spending
its way down Israelis are spending much
less except on food and tax revenues are
falling operations at several Israeli
ports close to Gaza have been disrupted
and production at a major offshore gas
field has stopped us oil giant Chevron
estimates that the Tamar field provides
70% of Israel's energy needs for power
generation and the Bank of Israel says
that even if the war remains contained
to Gaza economic growth which was
forecast to hit 3% this year will slow
to 2.3% in
2023 now the central bank has held
interest rates at 4 75% for the third
straight time in order to support a
weakening currency it has previously
said that it would sell up to $30
billion of reserves to shore up the
shekele the governor says that the
bank's policy is focused on stabilizing
markets and reducing uncertainty let's
talk about all of this I'm joined now
from London by Danielle biani Danielle
you are associate professor of Finance
at Queen Mary University of London thank
you for your time today how bad is this
for the Israeli economy
me uh thanks for having me um just
yesterday the Finance Minister uh put up
some some estimates of direct cost of
the war so far and the estimates are
roughly 250 million per day these are
just direct costs that are all sorts of
indirect cost that come up from from the
uh coll up of reservist obviously how
bad do you expect it might get because
we were just making the point that
consumers aren't spending right now
except for food consumption on food is
up um but consumption is half of the
Israeli economy domestic consumption do
you think a recession might happen
that's a very good point in fact
consumption is about a half of the
economic activity and it all depends on
how long it lasts and what is going to
be the repercussions for households and
firms uh it's it's complicated to give a
precise estimate I'm not expecting a
recession but it all depends on how long
it lasts what are the major indicators
that you're
watching well certainly uh labor Supply
uh exchange rates uh interest rates all
of those things are interl uh provided
that the conflict remains uh confined to
you know Israel Gaza and doesn't one
spread to other regions or to the Israel
uh territory uh proper right and that's
a big if what's the risk to the shekel
the Israeli currency well we've seen as
you said a large depreciation of the
shekel that basically spells inflation
which is one of the reasons why interest
rates have kept constant uh is a is is a
small open economy Israel so it's it's
highly depending how the sheele
fluctuates Vis A for instance the US
dollar or the Euro so it could be
problematic if the uh if the sheer keeps
keeps depreciating in in the coming days
and weeks and months do you expect that
the central bank is going to have to
sell more reserves to shore up the
currency I wouldn't be surprised again
it depends on how long it lasts uh uh so
if the if the conflict drags for for
months uh hopefully not not years then
we should we should probably expect some
intervention in terms of selling
reserves uh if they if they want to keep
uh the exchange rates under control
about government intervention Danielle I
want to ask you about that the
government is rolling out a massive
wartime stimulus program to support
people and businesses in Israel that
includes grants state-backed loans to
companies and financial assistance for
workers Banks and credit card companies
are allowing uh repayment deferrals but
all this extra spending is going to
increase the budget deficit and
ultimately public debt uh three credit
rating agencies warned that Israel's
creditworthiness could be downgraded
okay Danielle back to you perhaps since
since we just mentioned that the uh the
downgrading of the uh of the of Israel's
creditworthiness a standard and pores uh
downgraded Israel
now the Finance Minister says that's
alarmist and he has blown this off um
how significant do you think that is
should Israel care about that well
Israel is in relatively healthy
situation when it comes to the depth to
GDP ratio which stands as roughly 60%
but it's a matter of Outlook it's not
necessarily the stock of the debt but
how how the finances we we deteriorates
coming forward moving forward so again
it all depends on how widespread
widespread is the conflict and uh uh
it's it's hard to say what is going to
be the effect on the budget in the short
term is significant but in the long term
could be even more significant hence the
the downgrade of the Outlook from rating
agencies and the government stimulus
package which by the way is estimated to
be bigger more important than what the
government had to do during the pandemic
to shore up the economy do you think
that's enough to mitigate the dangers to
the economy well there's certainly a
psychological effect on households and
firms uh which cut spending there is
certainly the uh uh productivity effect
due to uh calling up reservice so there
is lots of things that are Interlink
it's hard to sa the stimulus is enough
but obviously they have to do something
to kind of calm down uh uh come down
households and firms and markets but
it's hard to safe is going to be enough
again it all depends on how uh wi spread
the conflict will be uh if any in in the
coming months hopefully hopefully not
talk to us about the scenarios for
Israel's economy um Israel has said that
there is no limit to how much it is
going to spend you know on its war
effort but what does that mean obviously
obviously the answers are going to
differ on how long this all lasts
absolutely uh well I mean there is
always a limit on how much you could
spend uh and as I said uh God forbid but
suppose that the conflict widespread to
the rest of the Israeli territory then
there's going to be effect on
infrastructure people playing you know
there's going to be several effects
several layers of effect depending on
how bad the situation will evolve uh as
I said hopefully not but it's hard to
say uh if the stimulus will be enough it
all depends on the trajectory that is
going to take the conflict if it remains
like circumscript to the to the Israel
Gaza uh setting then it might it might
be enough but it's hard to say at the
moment and and what if it doesn't remain
in Gaza uh as you just as you just said
what if the war escalates to other parts
of the Middle East then what well we've
been we've been these things throughout
the history if you look back at the 70s
uh there's been huge supply shock in
terms of oil and that creates inflation
uh Israel inflation back in the 70s was
like you know above
100% uh so certainly if the conflict
widespread to major oil suppliers such
as Iran for instance uh that could be
really problematic not just for Israel
but in fact the global economy at large
all right Daniel bian associate
professor of Finance at Queen Mary
University of London thank you so much
for joining us
today now at this stage we do want to
note that the economic situation for
Palestinians in Gaza and the occupied
West Bank is much worse Gaza is running
out of food water medicine and fuel due
to a total blockade by Israel hospitals
are struggling to keep generators
running and power life-saving medical
equipment small Aid convoys have started
delivering supplies from Egypt
excluding fuel but the un's relief
agency is calling for a massive increase
in assistance to Gaza Israel's military
offensive has destroyed entire
neighborhoods in the enclave and
displaced around half of Gaza more than
2 million Palestinians to know more
about this do watch our previous edition
of counting the cost where we detailed
the crippling cost of the war for Gaza
and its residence earlier this month
landmarks in Jerusalem and Bethlehem as
well as beaches in Tel Aviv were
bustling with tourists so was the UNESCO
heritage site in Jericho a city in the
occupied West Bank but ever since the
fighting between Israel and Hamas
started governments scrambled to get
their citizens back home and issued
Travel warnings to the affected areas
new visitors are now reconsidering their
plans here's a Roundup on tourism and
how that's affecting the region many
companies have canceled tours to Israel
and the Palestinian territories until
the end of the year cruise ship ship
avoided Israel's Shores and major
airlines have stopped flying to and from
Israel hotels across Israel have either
shut down or their housing Israelis who
left their homes near the Gaza Strip
while those in the occupied West Bank
suffered from a sharp drop in occupancy
rates many historic sites national parks
nature reserves restaurants are closed
and Aviation experts warn that the war
on Gaza could affect travel in other
Middle Eastern countries including Egypt
and Jordan Swiss International National
Airlines and Germany's Lanza have
already suspended flights to Lebanon
meanwhile lebanon's national airline has
reduced its flights by half as tensions
along the border with Israel intensify
the iranian-backed Hezbollah armed group
has exchanged fire with the Israeli Army
since the war on Gaza started the Middle
East Airlines decision came after
insurance companies reduced the war risk
coverage okay I am joined now uh in our
studio here in Doha by Alex macheras
Alex you're an aviation analyst and
you're a consultant let's start there
with this issue of insurance because you
were just explaining to me moments ago
that you know that that's the top of the
pyramid and everything trickles down
from there exactly so what we're seeing
is just like when conflict pops up
anywhere on the earth Aviation insurers
tend to call the shots so they are
currently forbidding most Airlines from
operating either to Israel Egypt Jordan
and Syria but also to other parts of the
region in light of the escalations and
in what is in what is happening when
airlines are in a position that they are
ultimately unable to go to those
destinations because there will be no
insurance cover what we then see is mass
Exodus of the carriers and we saw this
with Afghanistan we saw it with Sudan we
saw it in Ukraine and we are seeing it
now the airlines are simply in a
position where even if they were able to
determine and outline their own risks
and make their own assessments as to how
long they would be on the ground perhaps
they would go with the same crew there
and back if there is no insurance cover
that's a journey they cannot make how
big do you think the damage could be to
tour to Israel's tourism industry and
then I'll ask you the same question to
the tourism industry in the occupied
West Bank but let's start with Israel
sure so of course Israel relies heavily
on tourism much like most areas of that
region and travel is plummeting we have
new stats released overnight that show
that on the whole the entire region is
suffering when you zoom into that region
you have countries that are not
specifically at the heart of the
escalation Nations like Jordan for
example and Lebanon Lebanon seeing a 70%
fall in travel demand over this period
Jordan 50% and these are typically areas
across including with Tel Aviv and other
key destinations that in Winter they
would specifically benefit from those
higher tourism numbers because they
benefit from the warmer weather that
they can offer to Europeans and other
Travelers what about the arupa West Bank
it's the same the same dire situation
ultimately the Middle East and this
particular area of the Middle East is
now suffering in that fall in demand as
a whole these areas rely on air travel
to bring in tourists to bring in those
that are visiting friends and relatives
and so on and without air travel as as
we just mentioned with the insurance
being pull it's going to have a KnockOn
effect immediately and that's what we're
seeing now there is no stakeholder in
the whole travel ecosystem that is able
to have confidence in what is going on
and Aviation is inherently exposed to
just about everything but this level of
uncertainty is just too much for for
business as usual how quickly can things
pick up because right now we have a
tendency to be prisoners of the moment
and right now you know our viewers will
everybody can intuitively understand why
flights are down airports are shut
people are obviously not going on the
holiday to destinations that are in or
near a war zone how quickly could it
pick back up how lasting could the
damage be well the the unfortunate part
is that and we see this with other areas
of conflict uh around the world it takes
a while we really have to have a period
of stability that continues on for for
much longer than perhaps people imagine
before that confidence resumes when you
have Airlines for example Global
carriers that passengers are booked with
to then be passed on to hotels already
stating that they will not be operating
to the region for a minimum of 6 months
we know that unfortunately this part of
turbulence for this area of the Middle
East in terms of the financial stability
for travel and Aviation is here for the
the mid to Long Haul Alex beeres thank
you very much for all all that Insight
thank
[Music]
you the war on Gaza is not just
threatening the areas where it is
unfolding rich countries and the
international monetary fund and the
World Bank warned that a prolonged War
could compound The Fallout from the war
in Ukraine and there are real risks to
the global economy the Middle East is an
important energy supplier plus a vital
shipping route for goods among the major
concerns is oil prices which are
sensitive to geopolitical tensions now
look at the oil prices the price of the
global Benchmark that is Brent crude oil
Rose above $90 a barrel in the past two
weeks it has eased somewhat since then
after a diplomatic push to contain the
War uh price the price hit more than
$120 a barrel in March last year after
Russia's invasion of Ukraine it fell
back down to just above $70 a barrel in
May but then Rose steadily because major
producers cut out output at the time
observers say that if other countries
like Iran for instance are directly
involved in the war then that could
drive up the price of oil to
$150 a
barrel joining us from Brussels is hosuk
Lee makiyama you're the director of the
European Center for international
political economy thank you for joining
us talk to us about the volatility here
because we just don't really know where
this is going in terms of oil prices and
oil supplies well indeed um the truth is
um you are really pointing to the um the
real issue here which is actually about
the oil prices rather than the the
impact of the conflict itself because
Israel is actually a very remote part of
the global and even the regional economy
and so they actually the first order
implication of the war is quite muted
and it is very easy to draw recollection
on the 1973 war that quadruple the oil
price crisis we still have the Ukraine
crisis fresh in mind but so far there is
no embargo that we saw in 1973 and the
fact is that the political incentives
for OPEC looks very very different now
than it did back 50 years ago so what we
have seen is basically Energy prices
have not really soared with relatively
modest increases about 5% since the
conflict began and actually the bigger
driver on um the prices actually uh seem
to be the poor economic Outlook in
Europe with suppressed demand for oil so
um so far so good so far so good but
what are the scenarios that you're
looking at what are the possible
realistic scenarios the realistic
scenarios as uh are tend to be quite
unrealistic when it comes to this region
and uh or at least quite surreal and you
would look at uh implications that
involve for example a major producer
like Iran
and in order to see those effects that
we have been we have been heard in the
introduction around increase up to 150
or
$250 and even under these circumstances
we have to remember actually that the
the impact on global macro will be much
less on the on the Today Than in the
1970s simply is because of the fact that
the global dependency of oil has
actually haved in the last 50 years and
also the um the the cartel OPC and OPEC
plus is actually quite split in terms of
how you are responding to this crisis
and if you for example look at Qatar
that has t really taken up and open up
the Taps since the The War Began in
Ukraine and and now we are also hearing
from the United States that it might
actually open up its strategic reserves
so diversification over the last five
decades seem to have actually done a
little bit of the trick at least and we
are looking at a very difference
scenario if we are looking at
potentially Lebanon and even Iran
getting involved and uh there are a lot
of conversations going on bilaterally uh
between the different parties that don't
seem very United at the moment okay H
hosac hold on because I need to give our
viewers a quick reminder of why we talk
about the oil prices so much why are
they so important because when the price
of oil goes up the cost of almost
everything transport consumer goods food
not to mention energy bills the price of
all those things goes up for the past 18
months central banks have been trying to
rein in inflation and keep prices
contained at the US Federal Reserve has
been leading that effort and in its
latest report on financial stability the
FED said escalation of these conflicts
or a worsening in other geopolitical
tensions could reduce economic activity
and boost inflation worldwide uh
particularly in the event of prolonged
disruptions to supply chains and
interruptions in production ruction the
US fed has recently paused interest rate
hikes as inflation was showing signs of
cooling major central banks are worried
that high rates could significantly slow
economic activity and tip economies into
a recession the IMF warned of weak
Global growth at 3% in 2023 and slightly
less in 2024 that is well below the
historical average and the World Trade
Organization says that a widening War
would have a big impact on fragile
global commercial flows hosac back to
you there's a massive question here
around
inflation Global prices cost of living
you know it's something we've been
covering a lot of course cost of living
which which rose
sharply uh after the war in Ukraine
started and a lot of our viewers will be
listening to this conversation and
thinking well could we see something
like that happen again as a as a ripple
effect of the Gaza War well that's
that's my point the um the importance of
oil has as as a part of the global
energy supply has actually haved and
given the diversity of other sources
that has come up since the
1970s uh yes indeed we are already in a
recession uh but if we start in the end
of trade Israel is actually quite remote
part of the global economic system and
there are quite few supply chain well
there are only few supply chain
dependencies we are looking at when it
comes to Israel and um for example
things like diamond there are some
semiconductors in Israel as well but
that's Mo mostly in design rather than
fabrication so the supply chain effect
is actually quite limited and this comes
back to the point that unless you see a
regionalization of this conflict with
other players getting involved this is
economically a containable problem we
don't have a dependency for example for
food production that we had for example
in the case of Ukraine that supplied a
lot of the world food program who also
major exporter of grains and iron ore
and uh and therefore uh we are
exclusively looking at disruption on
supplies of um uh oil first and foremost
and here I come back to the point that
OPEC has been actually trying to
unilaterally suppress production and had
an agreement to actually reduce the
production up to 1 million Barrel per
year per day um and simply because of
the fact that we um the price is
actually not increasing in the amount
that it would like to be and I remind
also the viewers that op in in the op
constellation there's also an
configuration that involes more players
for example like Russia uh which is
called opic plus who has been rather
unsatisfied with the price um the the
global prices uh over the last 12 months
and who has actually agreed to
unilaterally suppress uh suppress
production already in the summer so what
we are seeing now is actually relatively
minor Corrections or movements in the
prices it is indeed true that the 2024
is going to be a very very difficult
year and not least given the US
elections coming up and we have we have
a uh let's say sensitivity around
increasing prices but so far especially
compared to the Ukraine crisis this has
been something that can be kept on track
and hasn't actually spilled over to the
other parts of the regions and how much
does all of that analysis change if then
the conflict does
escalate well then we are looking at a
completely different game alt together
of course and that's um that's um that's
something that I guess that a lot of
people are looking into whether hisbah
actually have an incentive to get
involved and if they do uh does Iran
actually have the incentive to continue
support to the extent that it would
actually tamper with the oil and now I
remind everyone that Iran and the US are
in the midst of negotiation for
releasing hostages against Frozen funds
that Iran has in South Korea and as a
former government negotiator myself I
mean I I tend to think that to keep
talking about some kind of a trade of
like hostages on funds has the best
deescalation effect uh on any kind of
War
and the fact that people are actually
negotiating bilaterally on um even in a
completely unrelated areas makes a
completely different image and sorry a
completely different picture in ter of
what we looking to and one final Point
here that we need to look at one of the
biggest bu is actually China and that
basically means that a lot of these
flows may actually continue even in the
case that there would be an embargo
against the West so there is a price
stabilization effect if the trade
between the gulf and China actually
continues to happen hosok Le makama
director of the European Center for
international political economy thank
you so much for joining us on the
program today thank you and that is our
show for this week do get in touch with
us on X formerly known as Twitter at van
seral is my handle do use the hash AJC
when you do or drop us an email counting
the cost at al.net that's the email
address but there's more for you online
at alses hero.com CC that will take you
straight to our page which has
individual reports links and entire
episodes for you to catch up
on that's it for this edition of
counting the cost I'm sirl vaner from
the whole team here in Doha thank you
for joining us the news on aljazera is
next